6.034 Quiz 2 
November 16,2005 
Problem 
Maximum 
number 
Name 
Email 
( Total / 100 
50 ILI%QO 5 
-- 
Problem 1. Constraint Propagation (34 pts) 
The following constraint network represents a coloring problem with 6 variables (Var 1 though 6) and one 
or two or three colors in the domain of each variable (B, G, R, and Y). Each line represents a constraint 
that requires that the two variables have different colors. 
Binary constraints between variables are due to touching regions, while the domain restrictions on each 

variable come from some other source. 

Part A: (6 pts) 

Draw a map containing 6 "countries" that exhibits the same constraints as the above constraint graph: 

I--
6
/-I 1
I 
\ 
5 
2, 
Two of the 6 countries are drawn for you. Draw 4 additional countries above such that if there is a 

constraint between two blocks, the two blocks share a boundary. 

Part B (28 points) 

Find one of the valid solutions for this problem using backtracking with forward checking AND 

propagating through singleton domains. Examine variables in numerical order and values in 

alphabetical order. 

(1) Variables are explored in numerical order, starting with Variable 1. 
(2) Values (Colors) are explored in alphabetic order (B first, then G, then R, then Y) 
Draw a search tree for using backtracking with forward checking AND pro saga tin^ throu~h sin~Jeton 
domains. 
In addition: 
1. 	For every node in the tree draw only the valid descendants at that point and 
2. 	 For every node in the tree draw the domains at that point, assuming constraint propagation runs 
through all singleton domains until no fiuther domain reduction is possible anywhere and 
3. 	 Mark with an ASTERISK (*) &nodes at which assignments initiate constraint propagation 
through singleton domains. 
Part B1: (4 pts) 
How many asterisks did you mark in your tree? 
Part B2: (8 pts) 
Interpret your tree by filling in the blanks below: 
The first time in the tree search that a variable assignment produces propagation through singleton 
domains is when variable I is assigned the value 2 . 
After propagation, the domain of variable(s) 5 b islare found to be empty, and backtracking 
occurs. 
Part B3: (8 pts) 
Circle either (I), (11) or (111), and fill in the corresponding blanks, if appropriate : 
e second time that a variable singleton domeains is 
when variable 2- is assigned the value 
After propagation, the domain of variable(s) -6 islare found to be empty, and backtracking 
occurs. 
(11) 
The second time constraints are propagated through singleton domains is when variable is 
assigned the value . 
After propagation, the search continues with another variable assignment. 
(111) 

Constraints are propagated through singleton domains a second time. 

Part B4: (8 pts) 
After the search is finished, the resulting variable assignments are: 
var 1 var 2 var 3 var 4 var 5 
R D T6 

Question 2: Nearest Neighbors and ID Trees 
(30 points) 
Mass in Kilograms 
Here is a set of data on Foos and Quxes. You want to classify a and b as a Foo or a Qux. (Note: if you 
need a straightedge, the side of a sheet of paper works well.) 
Part A: ID Trees (14 points) 
First, use the ID Tree idea. We have provided you with the first test: "Is the mass less than or equal to 6?" 
and drawn it below: 
10 
9 
8 
7 
6 
5 
4 
3 
2 
I 
0 
test 1 
Mass in Kilograms 
Key: 
=Foo 
0 =Qux 
- =boundary of 
test 1, <=6? 
= An unclassified 
data point 
Part A1 (4 points) 
What is the disorder of the first test? Write your answer in terms of fractions and logs. You need not 
compute a numerical answer with a calculator. 
Part A2 (6 points) 
Test2, which is to test just one variable, will occur if the answer to testl is true. Draw test2 below: 
IceskL 
test 1 
Mass in Kilograms 
Key: 
=Foo 
0 = Qux 
- =boundary of 
testl, <=6? 
= An unclassified 
data point 
the answer to testl is false. Draw 
- =boundary of 
test1, <=6? 
= An unclassified 
data point 
test3 below: 
Mass in Kilograms 
Part A4 (4 points) 
Using the ID tree ou have corn leted, how would you classif a and b? 
a is a -1 b i b i M 1 
Part B1 Nearest Neighbors (6 points) 
Now you classify a and b using nearest neighbors. Draw the decision boundaries for nearest neighbor 
decisions, assuming 1 nearest neighbor is all that matters, on the graph below. 
Mass in Kilograms 
Part B2 (4 points) 
Using 1 nearest neighbor, a is a 
= An unclassified 
data point 
andbisa 
Part C (6 points) 
Using 3 nearest neighbors, a is a [I andbisa 
Question 3: Neural Networks (36 points) 
Part A: Backward Propagation (24 points) 
For this part of the problem, you may find the backpropagationnotes attached at the end of the quiz to be 
helpful. Considering the following network, with sigmoidthreshold functions. 
Below are the initial weights, repeated in this table for your convenience. Note that wll does not originate 
from sigrnoid unit 1, but from XI,and w22 does not originate from sigrnoid unit 2, but from x2. 
The actual outputs of the units are as follows: 
yl (output of unit 1) = 112 
y2 (output of unit 2) = 112 
y3 (output of unit 3) = 112 
1
Using a learning rate of 2, and desired output of Y = 0, and an error function E = -(Y -Y*)~for the input
2 
(XI,x2)= [l, 11, backpropagate the network for one iteration, by computingthe new values for the weights 
w2~and w22 and filling out the values below. Provide numerical answers and show your work for partial 
credit. 6, = 33ir-$5)(yn.-$) 
w23 = 
3%-K6,j~ 
-- 1 ( / 2) ='/s 
w22= LJ,?- - R 5. gl-=) -
-- A,= y~-yd(~2363) . . 
Part B1: Boundary Lines (8 points)
n 
All units have step function thresholds, not sigmoids!! 
That is, output = 1 for input greater than 0; output = 0 for input equal to or less than 0. The black box in 
the diagram is a transmogrifier that converts its input into the following outputs: 
Z Out ut 
Draw the boundary line this unit produces on the following graph: 
Part B2 (4 points) 
What will our system output if we feed it any point above the boundary line? Circle your answer. 
Backprop notes 

where R is a rate constant and the 6s are computed with the following formulas: 
where 
ok 
is output k of the output layer 
dk 
is the desired output k of the o~~tput layer 
6 
is a delta associated with the output layer 
01, 
is output i of left layer in ;I left-right pair 
hr, 
is a delta associated with the layer 1 
, 
is a clclta associated with the adjacent layer to the right, layer r 

