                       
skip to content 
This is an archived course. A more recent version may be available at ocw.mit.edu.
 
 
  
Home
Courses
Donate
About OCW
 
           
  Advanced Search
 
Help
Contact Us
 
VIEW ALL COURSES
   f!--Left Nav Starts -->
Course Home
Syllabus
Readings
Assignments
Exams
Tools

 
Translations*
?????????
Archived Versions
Fall 2002
Home > Courses > Electrical Engineering and Computer Science > Artificial Intelligence 
Artificial Intelligence
As taught in: Fall 2006
 
Somewhere, something went wrong. (Anonymous.)
 
Instructors:
Prof. Patrick Henry Winston
MIT Course Number:
6.034
Level:
Undergraduate
 
 

Course Features
Assignments and solutions
Exams and solutions

Course Highlights
This course features interactive demonstrations in the tools section which are intended to stimulate interest and to help students gain intuition about how artificial intelligence methods work under a variety of circumstances. A complete list of assignments which focus on the application and science aspects of artificial intelligence is also presented.

Course Description
6.034 is the header course for the department's "Artificial Intelligence and Applications" concentration. This course introduces students to the basic knowledge representation, problem solving, and learning methods of artificial intelligence. Upon completion of 6.034, students should be able to: develop intelligent systems by assembling solutions to concrete computational problems, understand the role of knowledge representation, problem solving, and learning in intelligent-system engineering, and appreciate the role of problem solving, vision, and language in understanding human intelligence from a computational perspective.
 
*Some translations represent previous versions of courses.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
 

 
 
  
 RSS Feeds
Privacy and Terms of Use
Site Map
Cite OCW Content
Your use of the MIT OpenCourseWare site and course materials is subject to our Creative Commons License and other terms of use.
 
   
 
 