6.034 Quiz 3 
November 15,2006 
- - 
1 Problem number 
r 77 
Total 
- I loo bud I 
I 
i 
There are 8 pages in this quiz, including this one. 
Problem 1:Nearest Neighbors 
and Identification Trees (50 points) 
Part A: Nearest neighbors (16 points) 
David normally thinks of xs and os in terms of football plays, but this time, he is thinking 
about classification using nearest neighbors. He is given the following data: 
To decide if nearest neighbors is a good idea, David decides to treat of each of the ten 
points, one by one, as if it were an unknown to be classified rather than a sample. In each 
case, he asks if the nearest neighbor algorithm would produce the correct classification of 
the sample from the other nine samples. 
Part A1 (8 points) 
How many of the 10 samples would David's test correctly identify? 
Part A2 (8 points) 
How many of the 10 samples would David's test correctly identify if he used 3-nearest 
neighbors rather than just 1-nearest neighbor 
Part B: Identification trees (34 points) 
Laura needs to find a way to identify objects that belong to category x and to category o 
using the samples provided in the following diagram. 
Part B1 (10 points) 
Compute the disorder Laura finds for the decision boundary x = xl. You may write your 
answer in terms of a variable-free expression involving only integers, arithmetic operations, 
and logarithms. 
I 
Compute the disorder Laura finds for the decision boundary x = x2. You may write your 
answer in terms of a variable-free expression involving only integers and logarithms. 
Part B2 (8 points) 
On the diagram on the previous page, draw the decision boundaries Laura produces using 
the identification-tree algorithm. In case two decision boundaries are equally good, use a 
horizontal rather than a vertical. If there is still a tie, use the smaller threshold. You will 
not need to use a calculator to solve this problem. 
Part B3 (8 points) 
Patrick writes a program to solve the problem, but he makes a sign error in the method that 
computs disorder, so it computes the negative of disorder instead of disorder. Write the 
disorder Patrick's program finds for the first decision boundary it draws on the diagram. 
In this part, we want an exact numerical answer, with no logarithms. 
Write the equation for the first decision boundary placed by Patrick's program. 
Part B4 (8 points) 
Matt suggests that it would be interesting to repeat the algorithm with the data displayed in 
a polar coordinate system (0 = arctan (y/x); r = sqrt(x2+ 9)). 
Part B4a 
Sketch the data on the following coordinate system: 
Show the decision boundaries he produces by the identification-tree algorithm from 
these samples. 
Problem 2: Neural Nets (50 points) 
You now wish to train a neural net using gradient ascent on the standard performance 
function, P = -% (d-~)~.Dissatisfied with linear decision boundaries, you use a net 
containing a new kind of artificial neuron, B, which is the same as a standard sigmoid unit 
except that one input is the product of variables xl and xl. Both of the other artificial 
neurons, A and D, are standard sigmoid units. 
Part A (17 points) 
After running the first example in your training data through this net, you note that the 
output, z differs from the desired value d. Write an expression for Awbd, the amount by 
which wbd is adjusted during backpropagation of the result. The learning rate is r. Write 
your expression in terms of r, d, z, y,, yb, XI, x2, and any weights shown on the diagram. 
Recall that the sigmoid function o = s(i) is l/(l+e-') and its derivative is o(1-0). 
/h2b
Write an expression for Awd the amount by which wlb is adjusted during backpropagation 
of the result. Write your expression in terms of r, d, z, y,, yb, xl, x2, and any weights shown 
on the diagram. 
Part B (12 points) 
In this part, you are to work with the same neural net as in part A, but the neurons are not 
sigmoid units. Instead, each artificial neuron, A, B, and D is a threshold unit; each outputs 
1 if the sum of the weighted inputs is greater than 0, and 0 otherwise. The neural net is to 
distinguish between pineapples and the letter "L." The output of the net is interpreted as 
"L" when the output of the net, z, is 1, and "pineapple" otherwise. Which decision 
boundaries can the net correctly implement? You may assume that the xl and x2 axes have 
the same scale. Circle all that apply and cross out those that do not apply. 
Part C (21 points) 
In this part, you are to work with a neural net in which the neurons are not sigmoid units. 
Instead, each artificial neuron, A, B, C, and D, is a threshold unit; it outputs 1 if the sum of 
the weighted inputs is greater than 0, and 0 otherwise. Determine integer values for the 
weights in the network so that it correctly classifies all of the training data. The output of 
neuron D should be 1 for "L" and 0 for pineapple. Some weights zare provided for you. 
Wad 
